---
layout: default
title: Les croniques de Nicolas Trivet
utl_id: 613
---

### Description:

England, 1490/1510<br>
“Les croniques de Nicolas Trivet.” In _Polyglot compendium of English chronicles_<br>
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University, Houghton Library, MS Eng 750

### Background:

Nicholas Trivet (also spelled as “Nicolas” and “Trevet”) was an English Dominican friar and scholar, active in the late 13th and early 14th century, author of a large number of theological and historical works. He studied at Oxford and in Paris.

_Les Croniques_ is one of several Anglo-Norman chronicles Trivet wrote for his patroness, Princess Mary of Woodstock, a nun at Amesbury. It contains the tale of Constance, the source of Chaucer’s _Man of Law’s Tale_. The manuscript copy of Trivet’s text reproduced here is the only French-language text found in the _Polyglot Compendium of English Chronicles_, a compilation dating from the turn of the sixteenth century, held in the collection of the Houghton Library. For a list of the other texts included, see the Houghton <a href="http://hollis.harvard.edu/primo_library/libweb/action/dlDisplay.do?vid=HVD&search_scope=default_scope&docId=HVD_ALEPH009702806&fn=permalink">catalog entry</a>.

- Caroline Prud’Homme

### Bibliography:

- Barefield, Laura. “Lineage and Women's Patronage: Mary of Woodstock and Nicholas Trevet's _Les Cronicles_.” _Medieval Feminist Forum_ 33 (2002): 21-30.
- Correale, Robert M. “Chaucer's Manuscript of Nicholas Trevet's _Les Cronicles_.” _The Chaucer Review__: A Journal of Medieval Studies and Literary Criticism_ 25, no. 3 (1991): 238-65.
- Petersen, Kate O. “Chaucer and Trivet.” _PMLA _18, no. 2 (1903): 173–93.

### Manuscript Link:

[https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:1812](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:1812)
