---
layout: default
title: A nosseigneurs de la Cour des Aydes [calligraphy sample: mock legal document]
utl_id: 31
---

### Description:

17th century<br>
""A nosseigneurs de la Cour des Aydes [calligraphy sample: mock legal document]."" In _Choix artistique de modèles manuscrits des grands maîtres calligraphes français anciens et modernes_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Wing MS oversize ZW 11 .708,no. 1581<br>
 <br>


### Background:

This mock document presents an appeal supposedly brought to the [Paris Cour des Aides](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/content/french-institutions) (Court of Aids) in a matter of debt inheritance. The scribe used the handwriting style of Louis Barbedor, author of two calligraphy copybooks. As a member of the corporation of _maîtres écrivains jurés_ in Paris, Barbedor belonged to a group of experts who taught handwriting and also examined documents, signatures, and accounts suspected of forgery in the courts of justice. When the Parlement of Paris standardized handwriting models in 1633, Barbedor’s _lettre financière_ (or _ronde_) was selected as one of the two standard scripts. Our later document thus exemplifies a script used in many kinds of official documents.<br><br>
Here we find a complex fictional case, using improbable proper names based on the repetition of fundamental writing strokes (minims and curls). On behalf of the estate of Pierre de La Renouveauviere, Antoine de Mommiromouvant requests payment of 647 _livres _from Jacqueline de Vaumirouvieux to honor a debt contracted by her father, Edme de Guermouvois, and passed on to her upon his death. Jacqueline refuses to pay the sum, and presents evidence that Edme did incur a debt of 647 _livres_, but that the amount is owed to the royal treasury, rather than to Pierre's estate, because of Edme’s work as a tax collector in Vaumommoré and Sainct-Amour.<br><br>
A model for this document, “A Nosseigneurs de Parlement,” appears in Barbedor’s large _Escritures financiere, et italienne-bastarde dans leur naturel_, first published in 1647. In the edition from circa 1660 that we have digitized, that plate appears on[ page 6](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A527#page/16/mode/1up).<br><br>
- Caroline Prud’Homme and Carla Zecher<br>
 <br>


### Bibliography:

- Barbedor, Louis. _Les __escritures__ __financiere__, __et__ __italienne__-__bastarde__ __da__ns__ __leur__ naturel... _Paris: Drevet, 1703 [Reprint, Basel: Holbein, 1945]. <br>
- Mediavilla, Claude. _Histoire de la __calligraphie__ __française_. Paris: Albin Michel, 2006. On Barbedor, see pages 224-29.<br>
- Dupont-Ferrier, Gustave. _Études sur les institutions financières de la France à la fin du Moyen Âge_. Vol. 2:_ Les finances extraordinaires et leur mécanisme_. Paris: Firmin-Didot, 1932.<br>
 <br>


### Manuscript Link:

[http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:418](http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:418)