---
layout: default
title: Aveu et dénombrement de la seigneurie de Taillepied
utl_id: 33
---

### Description:

Sancheville,<a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 18 May 1490<br>
_Aveu et dénombrement des biens de la seigneurie de Taillepied tenus par Robine Bordinelle_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 123<br>
 <br>


### Background:

In medieval France, when a vassal gained possession of a fiefdom, generally through purchase or inheritance, he participated in an homage ceremony in which he pledged submission to his lord. Then, within 40 days, he was obligated to provide a written declaration -- an _aveu_ -- confirming the homage. This document was often accompanied by a _dénombrement_, a detailed list of the possessions the vassal held from his lord, with a statement of each party's rights and obligations.<br><br>
In the document presented here, vassal and lord both happen to be widows. Probably the _aveu_ was made when Robine Bordinelle lost her husband Thomas Peigné, and thus gained possession of the fiefdom of Taillepied. Possibly due to old age or illness, Bordinelle deputized her son Pierre to perform in her name the ceremonies of homage and provide the _aveu et dénombrement_ for each of Peigné's possessions.<br><br>
The document opens with Pierre's _aveu_ on behalf of his mother for the fiefdom of Taillepied, owned by Catherine de La Fontaine, lady of Verers and Taillepied, and widow of Jacques de Mainbier (fol. 1r). Next follows an extensive _dénombrement_ pertaining to a long series of parcels of land (fol. 1v-16v).<br><br>
For other examples of medieval homages, see _[Acte de foy et hommage au profit de noble homme Claude de Vignes, seigneur de la Vischardière](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A2074#237260ef-0a1b-4c61-9bf0-081244d8fb77)_,[ _Hommage for fiefs_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:2069#e1b98cec-8850-4b9f-adc5-3a28ebbbb8ff), and [Hommage de Jehan Vepres, dit le Moine, à son frère, pour un fief](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:2077#c9780d17-1aa3-4753-9499-20efb6ddd9bd).<br><br>
<a id="_ftn1">[[1]](#_ftnref1)</a> _Commune_ in Centre-Val-de-Loire, _département _Eure-et-Loir, arrondissement Châteaudun, _canton _Bonneval.- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
 <br>


### Bibliography:

- Bloch, Marc. _Feudal Society. _2 vols. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965.<br>
- Marion, Christophe. ""Les aveux et dénombrement du Vendômois : réalités et représentations (1311-1550)."" _Annales de Bretagne et Pays de l’Ouest _110, no. 3 (2003): 55-76.<br>
- Nieus, Jean-François, ed. _Le vassal, le fief et l’écrit. Pratiques d’écriture et enjeux documentaires dans le champ de la féodalité (XIe-XVe siècles). Actes de la journée d’étude organisée à Louvain-la-Neuve le 15 avril 2005_. Turnhout: Brepols, 2007.<br>
 <br>


### Manuscript Link:

[http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:448](http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:448)