---
layout: default
title: Double contrat de mariage entre les familles Berugnot et Baptauld
utl_id: 80
---

### Description:

Meursault,<a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 15 March 1616<br>
_Double contrat de mariage entre les familles Berugnot et Baptauld_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT folio Greenlee MS 478

### Background:

Marriage, in medieval and _Ancien Régime_ France, was serious business. Before a man and woman married, they would have a notary draw up a marriage contract, not only to set the details of the dowry, but also to protect the rights of the bride and determine her share of her family’s patrimony. As such, the marriage contract was an act of succession.

The marriage contract was usually drawn up at the bride’s residence, in the presence of members of both families, who would sign the official legal document, or _minute_. In the following days or weeks, the signatories would receive a copy of the marriage contract, signed only by the notary, called _expédition_. While the _minute_ was the official document, kept by the notary, the _expédition_ was usually preserved by families with other important papers, and could be used in litigations. As the _expédition_ represented the essence of the marriage contract, it was generally a solemn document, often written on a large piece of parchment, a noble and expensive material, in a beautiful and ornate handwriting.

The marriage contract presented here appears to be an unsigned contemporary copy made on paper for the family of Jeanne Berugnot. It is likely a copy of the _expédition_, made for safe-keeping. The document is fairly long and complex, because it involved two marriages between members of two families: Philippe Berugnot marries Nicole Baptauld, and his sister Jehanne marries Nicole’s brother Jehan. Both families lived in Meursault, and were wine growers.

For examples of _expéditions_ of marriage contracts on vellum, see: [_Epédition du contrat de mariage de Guillaume Lobeyrie et d’Anthonie Anglade_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A476#caf91ed7-a788-410b-8093-f3d92c85a452)_, _[_Expédition du contrat du mariage de Catherine Lobeyrie et Jean Favy_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A483#dfbb667f-fb18-4d1a-9775-0716c3244fd3)_, _ and [_Expédition du contrat du mariage de Jean de Jardon et de Françoise de Rochefort_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A484#52b4dfe1-d5f3-487c-9d00-866b691aed6b). For copies of marriage contracts on paper, within the nobility, see [_Marriage contract of Sauveur de Lombard and Antoinette de Geoffroy_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A464#b08acd2b-925e-4386-9375-df5790337bce) and [_Mariage d’Annet d’Anglars et d’Anne de Rochegude_/manifest](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:487#ee1d4f62-d324-45e4-b528-d23c2d008917).

- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[[1]](#_ftnref1)</a> _Commune_ in Burgundy, _département_ Côte-d'Or, _arrondissement_ Beaune, _canton_ Ladoix-Serrigny.

### Bibliography:

- Faggion, Lucien, Anne Mailloux, and Laure Verdon, eds. _Le notaire, entre métier et espace public en Europe, VIIIe-XVIIIe siècles_. Aix-en-Provence: Publications de l’Université de Provence, 2008.
- Roth-Lochner, Barbara. _De la banche à l’étude. Une histoire institutionnelle, professionnelle et sociale du notariat genevois sous l’Ancien Régime_. Geneva: Société d’Histoire et d’Archéologie de Genève, 1995.
- Smithers, W. W. “History of the French notarial system.” _University of Pensylvania Law Review _60 (1911-12): 19-38.

### Manuscript Link:

[https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:454/manifest](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:454/manifest)
