---
layout: default
title: Expédition du contrat de mariage de Catherine Lobeyrie et Jean Favy
utl_id: 78
---

### Description:

Saugues, <a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 9 February 1599<br>
_Expédition du contrat de mariage de Catherine Lobeyrie et Jean Favy_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 5027

### Background:

Marriage, in medieval and _Ancien Régime_ France, was serious business. Before a man and woman married, they would have a notary draw up a marriage contract, not only to set the details of the dowry, but also to protect the rights of the bride and determine her share of her family’s patrimony. As such, the marriage contract was an act of succession.

The marriage contract was usually drawn up at the bride’s residence, in the presence of members of both families, who would sign the official legal document, or _minute_. In the following days or weeks, the signatories would receive a copy of the marriage contract, signed only by the notary, called _expédition_. While the _minute_ was the official document, kept by the notary, the _expédition_ was usually preserved by families with other important papers, and could be used in litigations. As the _expédition_ represented the essence of the marriage contract, it was generally a solemn document, often written on a large piece of parchment, a noble and expensive material, in a beautiful and ornate handwriting.

Presented here is the _expédition_ of the marriage contract of Catherine Lobeyrie, daughter to Guillaume, whose [marriage contract](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A476#c31cc890-890b-4d9d-91c7-05d457683358) is reproduced here. A document related to Catherine’s grandfather Jean is the [_Procuration au profit de Jean Lobeyrie accordée par son beau-père Guillaume Du Pré_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A499#150c2ea9-6770-4f22-9478-d771e4f006c0). Notice the very elegant and solemn script used for this document.

These two contracts are part of a large archive of personal documents of allied noble families established in Auvergne, the _Lauzanne Family Papers_. They were probably acquired as part of a sub-collection of documents related to the Lobeyrie family, who allied with the Soubrany, the second most important family in the collection. Gilberte de Lobeyrie married Amable de Soubrany in 1636, and indeed brought to this family the _seigneurie de Bénistant_. From then on, the Soubranys became _Soubrany de Bénistant_. Guillaume and Catherine, though, are part of a _bourgeois_ parallel Lobeyrie branch, established in the community of royal notaries and public officers in the _commune_ of Saugues. For an overview of the collection, see the <a href="http://newberry.org/lauzanne-family-papers">_Lauzanne Family Papers_</a>.

Compare the dowry and details of the succession clauses in these two marriage contracts with those of members of the nobility: _[Marriage contract of Sauveur de Lombard and Antoinette de Geoffroy](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A464#b08acd2b-925e-4386-9375-df5790337bce) _and [_Mariage d’Annet d’Anglars et d’Anne de Rochegude_/manifest](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:487#ee1d4f62-d324-45e4-b528-d23c2d008917)_, _and [_Expédition du contrat du mariage de Jean de Jardon et de Françoise de Rochefort_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A484#52b4dfe1-d5f3-487c-9d00-866b691aed6b).

- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[1]</a> _Commune_ in Auvergne, _département_ Haute-Loire, _arrondissement_ Brioude_, canton _Gorges de l’Allier-Gévaudan.

### Bibliography:

- Bardet, Marie. _Le notariat royal en Haute-Auvergne de l’Ancien Régime à 1815. _PhD diss. Paris: École des hautes études en sciences sociales, 2005.
- Faggion, Lucien, Anne Mailloux, and Laure Verdon, eds. _Le notaire, entre métier et espace public en Europe, VIIIe-XVIIIe siècles_. Aix-en-Provence: Publications de l’Université de Provence, 2008.
- Roth-Lochner, Barbara. _De la banche à l’étude. Une histoire institutionnelle, professionnelle et sociale du notariat genevois sous l’Ancien Régime_. Geneva: Société d’Histoire et d’Archéologie de Genève, 1995.

### Manuscript Link:

[https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:483/manifest](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:483/manifest)
