---
layout: default
title: Expédition du contrat de mariage de Jean de Jardon et Françoise de Rochefort
utl_id: 79
---

### Description:

Ussel,<a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 2 May 1523<br>
_Expédition du contrat de mariage de Jean de Jardon et Françoise de Rochefort_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 5027

### Background:

Marriage, in medieval and _Ancien Régime_ France, was serious business. Before a man and woman married, they would have a notary draw up a marriage contract, not only to set the details of the dowry, but also to protect the rights of the bride and determine her share of her family’s patrimony. As such, the marriage contract was an act of succession.

The marriage contract was usually drawn up at the bride’s residence, in the presence of members of both families, who would sign the official legal document, or _minute_. In the following days or weeks, the signatories would receive a copy of the marriage contract, signed only by the notary, called _expédition_. While the _minute_ was the official document, kept by the notary, the _expédition_ was usually preserved by families with other important papers, and could be used in litigations. As the _expédition_ represented the essence of the marriage contract, it was generally a solemn document, often written on a large piece of parchment, a noble and expensive material, in a beautiful and ornate handwriting.

This _expédition_ is unusual in the sense that it was not drawn up shortly after the _minute_ was signed, but rather, about thirity years later, when a _confession_ was completed. The _confession_ was a solemn declaration by the husband confirming that he had received the dowry in full, and in certain cases, sums of money or real property supplementing the dowry.

This document forms part of a large archive of personal documents of allied noble families established in Auvergne, the _Lauzanne Family Papers_. It was likely added to the collection as a testimony of the ownership of the _seigneurie_ of Saint-Martial by the Rochefort family, who would later marry into the Langeac family, and bring the _seigneurie_ to them. Gilbert de Rochefort, _seigneur_ of Saint-Martial, had a son, Gaspard, and a daughter, Françoise, who married Jean de Jardon. Gaspard inherited the _seigneurie_ of Saint-Martial from his father, and passed it down to his daughter Anne, who married Gilbert-Allyre de Langeac in 1525. The Langeac then became _seigneurs de Saint-Martial_. For an overview of the collection, see the <a href="http://newberry.org/lauzanne-family-papers">_Lauzanne Family Papers_</a>.

- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[1]</a> _Commune_ in Auvergne, _département_ Cantal, _arrondissement_ Saint-Flour, _canton_ Murat.

### Bibliography:

- Bardet, Marie. _Le notariat royal en Haute-Auvergne de l’Ancien Régime à 1815. _PhD diss. Paris: École des hautes études en sciences sociales, 2005.
- Faggion, Lucien, Anne Mailloux, and Laure Verdon, eds. _Le notaire, entre métier et espace public en Europe, VIIIe-XVIIIe siècles_. Aix-en-Provence: Publications de l’Université de Provence, 2008.
- Roth-Lochner, Barbara. _De la banche à l’étude. Une histoire institutionnelle, professionnelle et sociale du notariat genevois sous l’Ancien Régime_. Geneva : Société d’Histoire et d’Archéologie de Genève, 1995.
- Smithers, W. W. “History of the French notarial system.” _University of Pensylvania Law Review _60 (1911-12): 19-38.

### Manuscript Link:

[https://french.newberry.t-pen.org/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:484/manifest](https://french.newberry.t-pen.org/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:484/manifest)
