---
layout: default
title: Contrat du mariage d'Annet d'Anglars et d'Anne de Rochegude
utl_id: 76
---

### Description:

Charbonnière-les-Vieilles,<a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 5 November 1571 (copy ca. 1595)<br>
_Contrat du mariage d’Annet d’Anglars et d’Anne de Rochegude_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 5027

### Background:

Marriage, in medieval and _Ancien Régime_ France, was serious business. Before a man and woman married, they would have a notary draw up a marriage contract, not only to set the details of the dowry, but also to protect the rights of the bride and determine her share of her family’s patrimony. As such, the marriage contract was an act of succession.

The marriage contract was usually drawn up at the bride’s residence, in the presence of members of both families, who would sign the official legal document, or _minute_. In the following days or weeks, the signatories would receive a copy of the marriage contract, signed only by the notary, called _expédition_. While the _minute_ was the official document, kept by the notary, the _expédition_ was usually preserved by families with other important papers, and could be used in litigations. As the _expédition_ represented the essence of the marriage contract, it was generally a solemn document, often written on a large piece of parchment, a noble and expensive material, in a beautiful and ornate handwriting.

The document reproduced here is not an _expédition_, but simply a copy of the marriage contract, made about twenty-five years after the signing of the _minute_. Before he got married, Annet d’Anglars gave land to his mother Avoise the Tabou in the [contract presented here](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A488#22a9ce7a-82f2-4f58-a13d-a6f0fa6bf124).

When Anne de Rochegude married Annet d’Anglars, she brought to her new family the _seigneurie_ of Rochegude, so Anne and Annet’s children adopted the name _Anglars de Rochegude_. Their great-grand-daughter Anne married Philibert de Lauzanne in 1676, at which point the _seigneurie_ became part of the Lauzanne apanage. Philibert de Lauzanne, sixth son of Pierre de Lauzanne and Louise d’Haultefaye, is the patriarch of an important branch of the Lauzanne family, which allied, among others, with the Soubrany de Bénistant and the Frétat de Chirac. This marriage contract was likely included in the _Lauzanne Family Papers _because of its connection to the _seigneurie _de Rochegude. For an overview of the collection, see the <a href="http://newberry.org/lauzanne-family-papers">_Lauzanne Family Papers_</a>.

For examples of _expéditions_ of marriage contracts from the Lauzanne Family Papers, see [_Expédition du contrat du mariage de Jean de Jardon et de Françoise de Rochefort_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A484#52b4dfe1-d5f3-487c-9d00-866b691aed6b)_, _[_Epédition du contrat de mariage de Guillaume Lobeyrie et d’Anthonie Anglade_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A476#caf91ed7-a788-410b-8093-f3d92c85a452)_,_ and [_Expédition du contrat du mariage de Catherine Lobeyrie et Jean Favy_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A483#dfbb667f-fb18-4d1a-9775-0716c3244fd3)_._
- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[1]</a> _Lieu-dit _Rochegude in Auvergne, _département_ Puy-de-Dôme, _arrondissement_ Riom, _canton_ Saint-Georges-de-Mons, _commune_ Charbonnières-les-Vieilles.

### Bibliography:

- Bardet, Marie. _Le notariat royal en Haute-Auvergne de l’Ancien Régime à 1815. _PhD diss. Paris: École des hautes études en sciences sociales, 2005.
- Faggion, Lucien, Anne Mailloux, and Laure Verdon, eds. _Le notaire, entre métier et espace public en Europe, VIIIe-XVIIIe siècles_. Aix-en-Provence: Publications de l’Université de Provence, 2008.
- Roth-Lochner, Barbara. _De la banche à l’étude. Une histoire institutionnelle, professionnelle et sociale du notariat genevois sous l’Ancien Régime_. Geneva: Société d’Histoire et d’Archéologie de Genève, 1995.

### Manuscript Link:

[http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:487](http://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:487)
