---
layout: default
title: Inquest regarding land disputes
utl_id: 52
---

### Description:

Riom,<a id="_ftnref1">[[1]](#_ftn1)</a> 2 April 1637<br>
_Inquest regarding land dispute_<br>
Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 5027

### Background:

Here we present a few pages of a document that records oral testimonies of people living in the village of Saint-Bonnet-le-Bourg,<a id="_ftnref2">[[2]](#_ftn2)</a> in Auvergne, regarding a disputed piece of land claimed by the Fayolle family.

The document is signed by Amable-Jacques de Soubrany (b. 1610), a lawyer, receiver general for taxes in Riom, and _conseiller en la sénéchaussée d’Auvergne et présidial de Riom_. As a civil officer, Soubrany oversaw the inquest, and heard the testimonies that are recorded in the document.

Amable-Jacques de Soubrany is the patriarch of an important land owning family established in Riom, in Auvergne. A large number of family documents are found in the [Lauzanne Family Papers](https://www.newberry.org/lauzanne-family-papers), including birth certificates and marriage contracts, wills, personal letters, quittances, legal dossiers, sale and leasing contracts, etc.

Amable-Jacques married Gilberte de Lobeyrie, lady of Bénistant, in 1636, and the family adopted the name “Soubrany de Bénistant” from then on. Our collection includes [three documents related to the Lobeyrie family](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/manuscripts.html?q=Lobeyrie). <br>
During the 17<sup>th</sup> and 18<sup>th</sup> century, the members of the Soubrany de Bénistant were particularly fond of the name “Amable,” which was given both to men and women. Jacques-Amable named one of his sons and one of his daughters Amable. His son Jacques-François married Amable Bournet. Among their children were Amable-Gilberte, Claude-Amable, and Amable-Jacques. This Amable-Jacques had a daughter named Amable, and a son named Jacques-Amable, who in turn had a daughter named Amable-Perrette and a son named Amable-Jacques. If the latter had had children, the “Amable” line might have continued, but he died without issue.

Jacques-Amable’s son Amable is the patriarch of another Soubrany line, known as “Soubrany de Verrières,” from which the famous revolutionary Pierre-Amable de Soubrany de Verrières de Macholles (1752-1795) is issued.

- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[1]</a> _Chef-lieu d’arrondissement_ in Auvergne, _département_ Puy-de-Dôme.<a id="_ftn2">[[2]](#_ftnref2)</a> _Commune_ in Auvergne, _department_ Puy-de-Dôme, _arrondissement_ Ambert, _canton_ Les Monts du Livradois. 

### Bibliography:

- Corail, Robert du. _Amable Soubrany de Macholles: sa jeunesse d’après quelques lettres et documents inédits_. Paris: Léon Vanier, 1906.
- Everat, Edouard. _La sénéchaussée d’Auvergne et siège présidial de Riom au XVIIIe siècle. __Étude historique_. Paris: Ernest Thorin, 1886.

### Manuscript Link:

[https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:490/manifest](https://centerfordigitalhumanities.github.io/Newberry-French-paleography/www/record.html?id=https://iiif.library.utoronto.ca/presentation/v2/paleography:490/manifest)
