---
layout: default
title: Receipt by Guillaume Duru, ""clerc de Monsieur le tresorier de Normandie"
utl_id: 97
---

### Description:

1448

### Background:

838

### Bibliography:

This receipt, signed by Guillaume Du Ru, documents the purchase of six sheets of parchment -- calfskins -- appropriate for writing on both sides. Du Ru was a scribe to the squire and soldier John Stanlaw (or Stanlow), who served as treasurer of Normandy in the 1440s, when the region was under the control of King Henry VI of England. Du Ru signed documents on Stanlaw’s behalf and was in charge of purchasing parchment to perform his duty. Du Ru was established in Rouen, as was Louis de Bavent, bookseller and parchment maker, who provided calfskins to clients such as Henri VI's representatives.<br>
See the Receipt for p[archment, ink and paper for the King of France's administration in Toulouse](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography:463#aa182375-f2de-482b-9c6a-abeb49a525f8) and the[_ Letter sent by John Stanlow to the viscount of Caen_](https://paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/paleography%3A432#12149960-b73a-4ef5-9c87-e1009459962b).<br>
- Caroline Prud’Homme<br>
<a id="_ftn1">[[1]](#_ftnref1)</a> Capital of the Seine-Maritime _département_ and Haute-Normandie region. <br>


### Manuscript Link:

[I, Guillaume Du Ru, clerk to my lord the Treasurer of Normandy, affirm having received from Pierre Baille, Receiver General of Normandy, from the hands of Louis de Bavent, parchment maker, six skins of parchment, for writing on both sides, by order of my said lord the Treasurer, to do writing and copying of certain royal ordonnances already issued by the King Our Lord in His realm of England to my lords the clerks recently assigned to the government of France and Normandy. Witnessed by me and signed by my hand the 29th day of March, after Easter, in the year 1448.<br>
 <br>
](I, Guillaume Du Ru, clerk to my lord the Treasurer of Normandy, affirm having received from Pierre Baille, Receiver General of Normandy, from the hands of Louis de Bavent, parchment maker, six skins of parchment, for writing on both sides, by order of my said lord the Treasurer, to do writing and copying of certain royal ordonnances already issued by the King Our Lord in His realm of England to my lords the clerks recently assigned to the government of France and Normandy. Witnessed by me and signed by my hand the 29th day of March, after Easter, in the year 1448.<br>
 <br>
)